The Big Bad - Part 2: Controlled Props (#257)
melt-ui/melt-ui: src/docs/content/controlled.md

Author: Not decided on the name/location in the nav for this file, but wanted to get the meat of the content here while it was fresh in my mind. I was thinking maybe in a separate nav section for controlled we could split off each of the different `controlled` pieces into their own page with a solid "quickstart" example.

Something along the lines of this:

Section Name: Controlled
-  Bring Your Own Store
-  Change Functions
-  Custom Events

Reviewer: I do like the idea of these separate pieces, but I wonder if they should be separate pages 🤔 

Let's see how they look as sep pages, might be good!

---
title: Controlled

> description: MeltUI components are uncontrolled by default, but offer the ability to be controlled.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
description: Melt UI components are uncontrolled by default, but offer the ability to be controlled.
```

---

<script>
    import { Callout } from '$docs/components'
</script>

<Callout type="warning">

Controlled components are an optional advanced feature and should only be used when necessary. If
you're unsure if you _need_ to use controlled components, you probably don't.

</Callout>

## Controlled vs. Uncontrolled

> There are various definitions for controlled/uncontrolled components, but in the context of MeltUI,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
There are various definitions for controlled/uncontrolled components, but in the context of Melt UI,
```

Author: Why did I mash those together everywhere 🤣

uncontrolled means that the state and stores of a component are created and managed by us.
Controlled means that the user (you) can create and manage the state and stores.

All components are uncontrolled by default, and in most cases, this is more than enough. However,
our goal is to provide as much flexibility as possible, so we offer a few ways to give you more

> control over the state & behavior of the components.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
control over the state and behavior of the components.
```

## Controlled Usage

For the following examples, we'll use the `Dialog` builder, but the same concepts also apply to
other builders. Be sure to reference the API docs for your builder to see what controlled options
are available.

### Bring Your Own Store (BYOS)

> Without you having to do anything, we create an `open` store within the Dialog builder, which
> updates when a trigger or close element is clicked/key-downed. We do return this store for you to
> use, but let's say you wanted to define your own `open` store in another file and share it with
> other components in your app that might need to track or update the open state of the dialog.
> 
> You could accomplish this using context or some other hacky solution, but things may become
> complicated quickly. Instead, we provide a way to pass your own `open` store to the builder.
> 
> It's as simple as passing your own `open` store to the `createDialog` builder.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
By default, we provide an `open` store from the `Dialog` builder that will have its state 
updated whenever a `trigger` or `close` element is clicked/key-downed. 

If you wanted to define your own `open` store so that its state could be shared and 
updated by other parts of your app, then we offer a way for you to supply your own.

It's as simple as passing your own `open` store to the `createDialog` builder.
```

```svelte {4,10}
<script lang="ts">
	import { createDialog } from '@melt-ui/svelte'

	const customOpen = writable(false)

	const {
		elements: { trigger, overlay, content, title, description, close },
		actions: { portal }
	} = createDialog({
		open: customOpen
	})
</script>
```

> Behind the scenes, we're using the custom `open` store you passed in instead of creating our own
> within the builder. So your store will be updated as the open store normally would, but you can also
> update it outside the builder.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Behind the scenes, we're using the custom `open` store you passed in instead of creating our own. Your store will be updated as the `open` store normally would, but you'll be able to freely modify its state outside of the builder.
```

### Custom Change Functions

In addition to passing your own stores, you can also pass your own custom change/updater functions
to handle the state updates manually. These can be used regardless of whether you use a custom
store.

> A "change function" is called when the value of a `state` store would normally change. It receives

Reviewer 2: As an alternative, this could be called a hook (😱) or a callback instead of a "change function"

Author: ... hook 🤢 - we can think about the naming while I finish making everything work lol

Reviewer 2: Mentioned this already on Discord, but I'll say it here too. Express and other web server frameworks uses a similar pattern to this and calls them "middleware", so that could be an option as well.

Reviewer: > Mentioned this already on Discord, but I'll say it here too. Express and other web server frameworks uses a similar pattern to this and calls them "middleware", so that could be an option as well.

If it were middleware, we would be accepting an array of change fn IMO. Also, I find it a bit weird calling it middleware when dealing with components... Same reasoning why the community chose Props over Args I'd say.

an object with `prev` and `next` properties, whose values are the previous and next values of the
store.

The `next` value is what the store would have been set to by default if the change function wasn't

> used. The `prev` value is the current value of the store.

Reviewer 2: If `next` is the next value and `prev` is the current value, would it make more sense to call it `curr` instead?

Author: I think this does make sense actually, what are your thoughts on this @TGlide ?

Whatever is returned from the change function will be used as the new value of the store.

The snippet below shows an example of how the change function could be used to prevent the `open`
store from being set to `true` based on some arbitrary condition.

```svelte {6-12,18}
<script lang="ts">
	import { createDialog, type CreateDialogProps } from '@melt-ui/svelte'

	const someCondition = false

	const handleOpen: CreateDialogProps['onOpenChange'] = ({ prev, next }) => {
		if (!someCondition) {
			return prev
		}

		return next
	}

	const {
		elements: { trigger, overlay, content, title, description, close },
		actions: { portal }
	} = createDialog({
		onOpenChange: handleOpen
	})
</script>
```

> Of course this is a contrived example, but at this point you should be able to imagine how you could
> use this to do some pretty cool things.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Of course, this is a contrived example, but it nicely demonstrates the power of this feature.
```

---

<script>
    import { Callout } from '$docs/components'
</script>

<Callout type="warning">

Controlled components are an optional advanced feature and should only be used when necessary. If
you're unsure if you _need_ to use controlled components, you probably don't.

</Callout>

## Controlled vs. Uncontrolled

There are various definitions for controlled/uncontrolled components, but in the context of MeltUI,
uncontrolled means that the state and stores of a component are created and managed by us.
Controlled means that the user (you) can create and manage the state and stores.

All components are uncontrolled by default, and in most cases, this is more than enough. However,
our goal is to provide as much flexibility as possible, so we offer a few ways to give you more
control over the state and behavior of the components.

## Controlled Usage

For the following examples, we'll use the `Dialog` builder, but the same concepts also apply to
other builders. Be sure to reference the API docs for your builder to see what controlled options
are available.

### Bring Your Own Store (BYOS)

> By default, we provide an `open` store from the `Dialog` builder that will have its state updated
> whenever a `trigger` or `close` element is clicked/key-downed.
> 
> If you wanted to define your own `open` store so that its state could be shared and updated by other
> parts of your app, then we offer a way for you to supply your own.
> 
> It's as simple as passing your own `open` store to the `createDialog` builder.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default, we provide an `open` store from the `Dialog` builder that will have its state updated
whenever a `trigger` or `close` element is pressed.

If you wanted to define your own `open` store so that its state could be shared and updated by other
parts of your app, then we offer a way for you to supply your own.

It's as simple as passing your own `open` store to the `createDialog` builder.
```

```svelte
<script lang="ts">
	import { createDialog } from '@melt-ui/svelte'

	const customOpen = writable(false)

	const {
		elements: { trigger, overlay, content, title, description, close },
		actions: { portal }
	} = createDialog({
		open: customOpen
	})
</script>
```

Behind the scenes, we're using the custom `open` store you passed in instead of creating our own.
Your store will be updated as the `open` store normally would, but you'll be able to freely modify
its state outside of the builder.

> A "change function" is called when the value of a `state` store would normally change. It receives

Reviewer: Maybe this marks the beginning of a new section?
